Why Python is Essential for Data Analysis (#2017)
section-engineering-education/engineering-education: articles/why-python-is-essential-for-data-analysis/index.md

# WHY PYTHON IS ESSENTIAL FOR DATA ANALYSIS

![hero image](/engineering-education/why-python-is-essential-for-data-analysis/datascience.jpg)

### Introduction

> Data is an essential part of any enterprise/business.
> It is critical to collect, process, and analyze data flow in a timely and accurate manner.
>  
> The data science industry is rapidly expanding. Data volume can be large, making information handling difficult and time-consuming.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Data is an essential part of any enterprise/business. It is critical to collect, process, and analyze data flow in a timely and accurate manner.
 
The data science industry is rapidly expanding. Data volume can be large, making information handling difficult and time-consuming.
```

> Python is a popular programming language in scientific computing because it’s many data-oriented feature packages can speed up and simplify data processing, saving time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Python is a popular programming language in scientific computing because its many data-oriented feature packages can speed up and simplify data processing, thus saving time.
```

> 

Reviewer: It would be great, if you could give a 1 - 2 lines intro on what this article is about, and the key takeaways

### Table of Content

- What is Python?
- What is Data analysis?
- Who is a Data analyst?
- What makes Python a brilliant choice for Data analysis?

> - Conclusion

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Conclusion
- Reference
```

### What is Python?

> Python is an object-oriented, high-level programming language.
> Its built-in data structures and properties, combined with dynamic typing and binding, make it ideal for Application Development and its use as a scripting language. Python's simple syntax emphasizes readability and reduces programming maintenance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Python is an object-oriented, high-level programming language.

Its built-in data structures and properties, combined with dynamic typing and binding, make it ideal for Application Development and its use as a scripting language. Python's simple syntax emphasizes readability and reduces programming maintenance.
```

Python is a programming language that can be used for a wide range of tasks. It can be used for other programming activities such as software creation, web development, script writing, unlike `HTML`, `CSS`, and `JavaScript`. 

### What is Data analysis?

Data analysis is the process of gathering raw data and converting it into information that users can use to make decisions.

> It entails inspecting, cleansing, transforming, and modeling data in order to uncover valuable information, draw conclusions, and aid decision-making.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It entails inspecting, cleansing, transforming, and modeling data to uncover valuable information, draw conclusions, and aid decision-making.
```

In today's business world, data analysis plays an important role in making scientific decisions and assisting businesses in operating more efficiently.
 
Data mining is a form of data analysis technique that emphasizes statistical modeling and information exploration for predictive rather than strictly descriptive purposes.

Business intelligence encompasses data analysis that is heavily reliant on aggregation, focusing primarily on business information and decision-making to boost profit turnover. 

### Who is a Data analyst?

Data analysts are in charge of interpreting data, analyzing the results using statistical techniques, and producing regular reports. They plan and carry out data assessments, data collection processes, and other statistical reliability and quality-improvement techniques. They are also in charge of data processing and database management from primary and secondary sources.

### What makes python a brilliant choice for Data analysis?

> Python is a multi-functional, maximally interpreted programming language with a number of advantages that is often used to streamline massive, complex data sets. Python has a number of distinguishing characteristics that make it the best option for data analysis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Python is a multi-functional, maximally interpreted programming language with several advantages that are often used to streamline massive, complex data sets. Python has a number of distinguishing characteristics that make it the best option for data analysis.
```

See the features below.

> ### Easy to Learn

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Easy to Learn
```

Python focuses on both simplicity and readability, while also providing a plethora of useful options for data analysts/scientists. As a result, even novices can easily use its relatively simple syntax to create effective solutions for complex scenarios with just fewer lines of code.

> ### Flexibility

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Flexibility
```

Python's extreme versatility is another powerful attribute that makes it popular among data scientists and analysts. As a result, data models can be created, data sets can be systematized, ML-powered algorithms can be developed, web services can be developed, and data mining can be used to complete various tasks in a short amount of time.

> ### Huge Libraries Collection

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Huge Libraries Collection
```

It has many completely free libraries that are open to the public. That is a key factor that makes Python essential for Data analysis and in data science too. Users who work in the field of data science, are probably familiar with names like `Pandas`, `SciPy`, `StatsModels`, and other libraries that are widely used in the data science community.

It is worth noting that the libraries are constantly expanding, providing robust solutions.

> ### Graphics and Visualization

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Graphics and Visualization
```

Visual information is well known for being much easier to comprehend, work, and recall.

Python provides users with a plethora of different visualization options. As a consequence, it is a must-have method for all data science, not just data processing. By developing numerous charts and graphics, as well as web-ready interactive plots, data analysts can make data more available.

> ### Built-in data analytics tools

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Built-in data analytics tools
```

Python’s built-in analytics tools make it a perfect tool for processing complex data.

Python's built-in analytics tools can also easily penetrate patterns, correlate information in extensive sets, and provide better insights, in addition to other critical matrices in evaluating performance.

### Conclusion

> Any company's ability to derive information and insights from data in order to make good strategic decisions, stay competitive, and progress is directly linked to its performance. Python is an internationally recognized programming language that can assist users in better managing of data for a variety of reasons.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Any company's ability to derive information and insights from data in order to make good strategic decisions, stay competitive, and progress is directly linked to its performance. Python is an internationally recognized programming language that can assist users in better managing data for a variety of reasons.
```

Python is the most popular language among data analysts and data scientists due to its extensive set of graphical options and visualization tools that make data more available. Furthermore, it is constantly evolving and becoming more powerful, multi-featured, and versatile.

### Reference

> [pdfdrive](https://www.pdfdrive.com/python-data-analytics-data-analysis-and-science-using-pandas-matplotlib-and-the-python-programming-language-e158003322.html)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [pdfdrive](https://www.pdfdrive.com/python-data-analytics-data-analysis-and-science-using-pandas-matplotlib-and-the-python-programming-language-e158003322.html)
```

Reviewer: This link doesn't seem to work. It shows 404 for me. Could you add some other link?
